So now I've talked a bit about
what reactive programming is
and I've given you an overview
of Java completable futures,
let's go ahead and describe
how Java's completable futures
framework maps onto
these key principles
of reactive programming.
As you can see here, the
completable futures model
maps quite nicely onto the
key reactive programming
principles.
Let's start with responsive.
Responsiveness in
completable futures
is done by avoiding blocking
in user code or more
specifically in
user interface code.
So we want to try
to avoid blocking
if at all possible in
this code because blocking
ends up underutilizing
the processor cores.
It impedes the
inherent parallelism
on a platform on a system
with the hardware and software
stacks and so on.
And it also has a tendency to
complicate program structure
if you're not very careful.
The way this is done
in completable futures
is through a set of
methods that it defines.
It has methods called
factoring methods
that create completable
futures and run operations
asynchronously.
It has something called
completion stage methods,
which are used to
handle the results
of previous completable future
processes that have finished
running when they're done
running asynchronously
as well as something
called arbitrary
error team methods,
which are ways
of taking groups of
completable futures
and then having a single way
to wait for them all to finish.
And by using these, you can
avoid having to block threads.
In fact, if you're writing
certain kinds of applications,
you'd never have
to block at all.
Other applications you have
to block sparingly in order
to get the result back before
feeding it to the user,
for instance.
Another way you can
be more responsive
in completable futures is by
programming in a manner that
avoids changing threads.
It turns out that
changing threads
moving one computation
from one thread
and passing it to
another thread actually
can incur a fair
amount of overhead
in terms of synchronization
overhead, context switching
overhead, memory management
overhead, and cache management
overhead-- processor
cache management overhead.
So wherever possible,
we might want
to avoid that just to increase
the performance of the system,
take better advantage
of parallelism,
and be more responsive.
The way this works is by
using the Java fork-join pool,
which as we've seen in
previous weeks' lessons,
gives us this wonderful ability
to run lots of computations
efficiently and scalably
on multiple cores,
maximizing utilization
through work stealing.
And there's also a set of
so-called non-async methods
that are part of
the completion stage
API of completable futures.
And these methods also
avoid changing threads,
and we'll talk more
about these subtleties
as we get further
into the discussion.
But I just want to
outline it here.
Another key property
that we have,
key principle for
reactive programming,
is being resilient.
And the way that completable
futures handles this property
is by having exception
methods, which
are a variant of
completion stage methods
that help to make a program more
resilient to partial failures.
So if a asynchronous operation
goes awry and happens to fail,
then the exception methods that
are built into the completion
stage API will allow
the overall program
to continue to
execute and allow us
to gracefully catch those
asynchronous exceptions
and handle them, thereby
decoupling the error processing
path from the normal
operation processing path.
As we'll see here,
completable futures
are localized to
a single process
just like parallel streams.
They don't run in a
networked cluster.
So just keep that
in mind we're going
to be resilient to
failures of operations,
not failures of nodes here.
If you want resilience
with failures of nodes,
you have to use a broader
middleware technology
like Hadoop or Sparks.
The third key reactive
programming principle
that completable future supports
is the notion of elasticity.
And basically the
idea here is you
want asynchronous computations
to be able to run scalably
in a pool of threads
that are multiplexed
on top a set of cores.
And the way this
works, of course,
with the completable
futures is you can either
use a common fork-join
pool, which is the default,
some user defined
fork-join pool,
or various predefined or
user-defined thread pools.
So you can pick
the pools you want,
and that can be used to help
run your code more elastically.
And then the final principle
that reactive programming
espouses is the concept
of being message driven.
As I said before, that's really
more of a implementation detail
than a real quality
of service dimension.
But with Java's
thread pools, they
support message
passing internally.
That's the way
thread pools work.
They pass messages
between threads.
Obviously if you think about
the fork-join pool for sure,
it supports work stealing of
tasks, which are basically
messages, which are passed back
and forth between the decks
in the fork-join pool.
And as we look more into
the internal workings
of the completable
future framework itself,
you'll see that they
pass messages around
in order to be able to enqueue
the asynchronous operations
to run in the appropriate
worker thread in whatever thread
pool we happen to be using.
So messages are used
quite extensively
throughout the completable
futures framework
even though the API it
offers to programmers
is a method call oriented API.
So it's really a method
call oriented API which
provides a facade
atop a message passing
engine underneath the hood.